.\" @(#)sera 96/20/01
.\" GNU Copyleft 1996 Admas Concepts
.TH SERA 1 "11 Tr 1988 (20 Jan 1996)" "Admas Concepts"

.SH NAME
.ce
.BI "SERA --"  " The System For Ethiopic Representation in ASCII"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I SERA
is 
.B not
a software in and of itself, it is a transcription system for Fidel
employed by an ever growing number of software applications.
.SH OPTIONS

.I SERA
supports options for the different writing rules of languages that
use Fidel.  Languages rules can be specified at any time in a body 
of text by giving their ISO-639 language codes as:
.TP
\\~am or \\~amh
Set Amharic writing rules.  This setting affects the transcription of
``\fBa\fP'' to be read as the 1st and not the 4th vowel. Amharic phonetic
rules will be used for phonetic filters and transliterators.
.TP
\\~ti or \\~tir
The default.  Sets Tigrigna writing rules.  These are the regular Fidel 
writing rules used by most languages. Tigrigna phonetic rules will be used
for phonetic filters and transliterators.
.TP
\\~gz or \\~gez
Ge'ez phonetic rules will be used for phonetic filters and transliterators.
.SH " "
The following options can be used at any time in a body of text to change 
the rules for the associated punctuation usages:
.TP
\\~`: 
 Use : for Ge'ez Wordspace `: (The Default)
.TP
\\~-:
 Use : for Ge'ez Colon -:
.TP
\\~?
 Use  ? for Ge'ez Stylized Question Mark
 Use `? for Ge'ez 3-Dot Question Mark (The Default)
.TP
\\~`|
 Use  ? for Ge'ez 3-Dot Question Mark
 Use `? for Ge'ez Stylized Question Mark

.bp
.SH The SERA Fidel

      1     2     3     4     5     6     7       8
     g`Iz  ka`Ib sals  rab`I hams  sads  sab`I  diqala -->
      8    (9)   10     11    12   13

  1   he    hu    hi    ha    hE    h     ho
  2   le    lu    li    la    lE    l     lo    lW\\lWa
  3   He    Hu    Hi    Ha    HE    H     Ho    HW\\HWa
  4   me    mu    mi    ma    mE    m     mo    mW\\mWa
  5  `se   `su   `si   `sa   `sE   `s    `so   `sW\\`sWa
  6   re    ru    ri    ra    rE    r     ro    rW\\rWa
  7   se    su    si    sa    sE    s     so    sW\\sWa
  8   xe    xu    xi    xa    xE    x     xo    xW\\xWa
  9   qe    qu    qi    qa    qE    q     qo    
     qWe  (qWu)  qWi   qWa    qWE   qW
 10  `qe   `qu   `qi   `qa   `qE   `q    `qo      
 11   Qe    Qu    Qi    Qa    QE    Q     Qo    
     QWe  (QWu)  QWi   QWa   QWE    QW
 12   be    bu    bi    ba    bE    b     bo    bW\\bWa
 13   ve    vu    vi    va    vE    v     vo    vW\\vWa
 14   te    tu    ti    ta    tE    t     to    tW\\tWa
 15   ce    cu    ci    ca    cE    c     co    cW\\cWa
 16  `he   `hu   `hi   `ha   `hE   `h    `ho    
     hWe   hWu   hWi   hWa   hWE    hW
 17   ne    nu    ni    na    nE    n     no    nW\\nWa
 18   Ne    Nu    Ni    Na    NE    N     No    NW\\NWa
 19    e/\fBa*\fP  u     i     a     E    I      o     e3
 20   ke    ku    ki    ka    kE    k     ko    
     kWe  (kWu)  kWi   kWa   kWE   kW
 21  `ke   `ku   `ki   `ka   `kE   `k    `ko      
 22   Ke    Ku    Ki    Ka    KE    K     Ko    
     KWe  (KWu)  KWi   KWa   KWE    KW
 23   Xe    Xu    Xi    Xa    XE    X     Xo     
 24   we    wu    wi    wa    wE    w     wo
 25   `e    `u    `i    `a    `E   `I     `o
 26   ze    zu    zi    za    zE    z     zo    zW\\zWa
 27   Ze    Zu    Zi    Za    ZE    Z     Zo    ZW\\ZWa
 28   ye    yu    yi    ya    yE    y     yo    yW\\yWa
 29   de    du    di    da    dE    d     do    dW\\dWa
 30   De    Du    Di    Da    DE    D     Do    DW\\DWa
 31   je    ju    ji    ja    jE    j     jo    jW\\jWa
 32   ge    gu    gi    ga    gE    g     go    
     gWe  (gWu)  gWi   gWa   gWE   gW
 33  `ge   `gu   `gi   `ga   `gE   `g    `go      
 34   Ge    Gu    Gi    Ga    GE    G     Go    
     GWe  (GWu)  GWi   GWa   GWE   GW
 35   Te    Tu    Ti    Ta    TE    T     To    TW\\TWa
 36   Ce    Cu    Ci    Ca    CE    C     Co    CW\\CWa
 37   Pe    Pu    Pi    Pa    PE    P     Po    PW\\PWa
 38   Se    Su    Si    Sa    SE    S     So    SW\\SWa
 39  `Se   `Su   `Si   `Sa   `SE   `S    `So
 40   fe    fu    fi    fa    fE    f     fo    fW\\fWa  
 41   pe    pu    pi    pa    pE    p     po    pW\\pWa


.B * ``a'' 
is 
.I only
valid for (e) in transcription for Amharic.

.SH Equivalents

Consonant Series   Special Series     Lone Vowels

   B   =   b         s2   =   `s       O   =   o
   F   =   f         h2   =   `h      `O   =  `o
   J   =   j         S2   =   `S       U   =   u
   L   =   l         e2   =   `e      `U   =  `u
   M   =   m         q2   =   `q       A   =   a
   R   =   r         g2   =   `g      `A   =  `a
   V   =   v
   Y   =   y
.TP
W   = 
when not preceded by a consonant as defined above; it 
is left to the specific application to interpret.
-- It may be ignored or given an additional phonetic
character if available.


.SH Punctuation and Numbers in Fidel Text Zones

  ,    Ge'ez Comma
  ;    Ge'ez Semicolon 
 `:    Ge'ez Wordspace
 :-    Ge'ez Preface Colon
 -:    Ge'ez Colon
  :    Ge'ez Wordspace \fBor\fP Ge'ez Colon 
       Depending on Default Settings
 ::    Ge'ez Full Stop
 <<    Ge'ez Left Quote
 >>    Ge'ez Right Quote
 :|:   Ge'ez Paragraph Terminator
 `!    Ge'ez Sarcasm Mark
 `|    Ge'ez 3-Dot Question Mark 
 `?    Ge'ez 3-Dot Question Mark \fBor\fP Ge'ez Stylized 
       Question Mark Depending on Default Settings
  ?    Ge'ez Stylized Question Mark \fBor\fP Ge'ez 3-Dot
       Question Mark Depending on Default Settings
  .    Ge'ez Stylized Dot

 \\\\    Latin BackSlash
 \\,    Latin Comma
 \\;    Latin Semicolon
 \\:    Latin Colon
 \\.    Latin Full Stop
 \\'    Latin Apostrophe
 \\`    Latin Backquote

 '     is always ignored 
 `     is ignored unless a special vowel, consonant, or 
       punctuation follows
          -- s,S,h,g,q,e,u\\U,i,a\\A,E,I,o\\O,?

 ''    Geminates character on left
 `'    Voiced Sads Vowel 
       ('' and `' are for phonetic use and ignored in most 
        software)

  0...9  Arabic Numerals
 `1..`9  Ethiopic Numerals


.SH Punctuation and Numbers in Latin (or other) Text Zones

 \\,    Ge'ez Comma
 \\;    Ge'ez Semicolon 
 \\`:   Ge'ez Wordspace
 \\:-   Ge'ez Preface Colon     
 \\-:   Ge'ez Colon     
 \\:    Ge'ez Wordspace \fBor\fP Ge'ez Colon 
        Depending on Default Settings
 \\::   Ge'ez Full Stop
 \\<<   Ge'ez Left Quote
 \\>>   Ge'ez Right Quote 
 \\:|:  Ge'ez Paragraph Terminator 
 \\`!   Ge'ez Sarcasm Mark
 \\`|   Ge'ez 3-Dot Question Mark 
 \\`?   Ge'ez 3-Dot Question Mark \fBor\fP Ge'ez Stylized 
        Question Mark Depending on Default Settings
 \\?    Ge'ez Stylized Question Mark \fBor\fP Ge'ez 3-Dot
        Question Mark Depending on Default Settings
 \\.    Ge'ez Stylized Dot

 \\\\    Latin Backslash

   0..9   Arabic Numerals
 \\`1..`9  Ethiopic Numerals


.SH Special Escapes
.TP
\^\\
Change to next language of the defined primary-secondary pair.

.TP 
\^\\:;'. 
When followed by a punctuation list of one or more items
the list is transcribed in the next language of the defined
primary-secondary pair. 

.TP 
\^\\!
The "Verbatim Mode Toggle".  The switch turns the mode on-off
treating all text as one script until the closing \\! .
This allows extended use of \\ and \\~ without the
requirement for \\ and \\~ but at the cost of using
only one script within the text region.  


.TP 
\^\\~
If followed by a defined character, the appropriate event occurs.
It is left to software houses to recognize each others' graphic
escape sequences and provide filters.  \\~ is recommended as a means 
to denote in ASCII the nonstandard characters and glyphs of a font
set.

.TP 
\^\\~xy  
Change to language or script ``xy''.  ``xy'' MUST be followed by " ". 

.TP 
\^\\~x   
Ignored if "x" is a " " or undefined in an application.
A " " following "x" is the required terminator.


.TP
\^ < > & ;   
Contents between remain in Latin script in HTML documents.

.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
 mule(1), sera2any(1), sera2latex(1), fbanner(1), ecal(1)

.SH MAINTAINERS
.PP
 dan'El ya`Iqob mekonn yacob\fB@\fPpadis.gn.apc.org
 yTna biniyam frdywek ybf2u\fB@\fPcurry.edschool.virginia.edu
