.\" @(#)sera2any.1 2.3.1 96/20/01
.\" GNU Copyleft 1996 Admas Concepts
.TH sera2any 1 "11 Tr 1988 (20 Jan 1996)" "Admas Concepts"
.SH NAME
.ce
.B sera2any \c
\- converts SERA Fidel into a specified output system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sera2any
[
-\c
.ul 
c
]
[
-\c
.ul 
h
]
[
-\c
.ul 
l
]
[
-\c
.ul 
o
.I system
]
[
-\c
.ul 
q
]
[
-\c
.ul 
rtf
]
[
-\c
.ul 
s
]
[
-\c
.ul 
stats
.I system
]
[
-\c
.ul 
v
] <
.I infile ...
>
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\f4sera2any\fP is a utility for conversion of SERA text into a secondary
output system.  \fBsera2any\fP works with the \fBlibeth\fP parsing engine
written in AT&T lex and GNU flex.  A variety of command line options are
offered to set SERA defaults when they are not defined in the document
body.  \fBsera2any\fP output is written to stdout.  Current output
encoding option are for Unicode, Japanese Industrial Standard (JIS),
and the Japanese Unix Network (JUNET).  RTF and limited TeX and LaTeX
support is also offered.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\^c
Map ASCII colon, ":",  to Ge'ez colon (-:) and \fBnot\fP to the
default Ge'ez wordspace (:). Ge'ez word space may now
.ul
only
be given by `: .
.TP
.B \-\^fromdos
The input file is DOS text, strip out DOS ^M end of line characters.  Output
will be in Unix text.  This option impacts parsing speed and is only available
when \fBsera2any\fP is compiled for DOS support.
.TP
.B \-\^h
Echoes help list to stderr and exits.
.TP
.B \-\^html
Forces HTML conversion, leaving text between \fB<\fP and \fB>\fP or \fB&\fP and \fB;\fP as Latin.

.TP
.B \-\^l LL(L)
Set starting language to that specified by LL or LLL where LL(L)
is an ISO-639 two or three letter identifier.  Supported languages
are: am(h), ge(z), la(t), & ti(r).
.TP
.B \-\^o system
Specify output of type \fBsystem\fP. \fISystem\fP defaults as JUNET or may 
be one of \fBsera\fP, \fBalxet\fP, \fBagafari\fP, \fBfeedel\fP, \fBjis\fP, 
\fBjava\fP, \fBuni\fPcode, or \fBwashra\fP.  Appending \fI-html\fP to the 
\fBsystem\fP forces the scanner to leave as Latin all text between < and >.
.sp
Example:
.br
.B -o uni    
[Unicode Output]
.br
.B -o jis-html 
[JIS Output With HTML Filtering]
.TP
.B \-\^q
Map ASCII question mark, "?", to Ge'ez 3-Dot question mark (`?) and \fBnot\fP
to the default Ge'ez stylized question mark (?).  The use of ? and `? in SERA 
text are now reversed.
.TP
.B \-\^rtf
Output in Rich Text Format.  Supported for Agafari, ALXEthiopian, Feedel, 
and Washra fonts currently.
.TP
.B \-\^s
Map ASCII space, " ", to Ge'ez wordspace (:).
.TP
.B \-\^stats system
Provides a Fidel table with statistical output of character
occurrences into the files "fidel.stats" and sorted statistics in 
"fidel2.stats".  \fISystem\fP defaults as sera or may be one of 
\fBjun\fPet, \fBjis\fP, \fBalxet\fP, \fBagafari\fP, \fBfeedel\fP, 
\fBuni\fPcode, or \fBwashra\fP.  Appending \fI-html\fP to the \fBsystem\fP
name will format the statistics output for HTML. 
.sp
Example:
.B -stats jis-html
.TP
.B \-\^todos
The input file is Unix text, insert DOS ^M end of line characters.  Output
will be in DOS text.  This option impacts parsing speed and is only available 
when \fBsera2any\fP is compiled for DOS support.
.TP
.B \-\^v
Echo version number and exit.

.SH AVAILABILITY
.LP
By ftp:  https://github.com/dyacob/sera2any/

.SH Text References
.LP
.ul
The System For Ethiopic Representation In ASCII,
.br
https://www.academia.edu/87262743/The_System_for_Ethiopic_Representation_in_ASCII
.ul
The System User's Guide
.br
https://www.academia.edu/87262938/The_SERA_Users_Guide
.br
.ul
The SERA FAQ
.br
http://www.abyssiniagateway.net/fidel/sera-faq.html

.SH SEE ALSO
sera(1), pssera(1)

.SH BUGS
None reported, but lurking...
